Fix transient illconditioning with SCM (#33446)
idaholab/moose: modules/subchannel/doc/content/modules/subchannel/general/subchannel_theory.md

    id=fig:dis
    caption=Subchannel collocated discretization.

> The governing equations are discretized as follows. In transient calculations, SCM uses a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Time grid discretization

In transient calculations, SCM uses a
```

first-order backward Euler discretization for all temporal storage terms. Storage is evaluated at
the downstream node of each axial control volume. Because this time discretization is implemented
directly by SCM, selecting a MOOSE time integrator other than `ImplicitEuler` does not change it;
SCM issues a warning when another time integrator is requested.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Spatial discretization

```

\end{bmatrix}
\end{equation}

For a segregated solve, this is equivalent to:

\begin{equation}
\label{mass-dis3}
\boldsymbol{M_{mm}} \vec{\dot{m}} = \vec{b_m} - \boldsymbol{M_{mw}}\vec{w}
\end{equation}

> In the transient monolithic solve, the new-time density in the storage term is also linearized with

Reviewer: is this a new term?

Reviewer: looks like it.

"the storage term" isnt known terminology

where is drho/dp appearing in the equations? in drho/dt?

Author: You drho/dt was treated completely explicitly which is fine when the time step is larger. But as I kept decreasing the time step, the feedback increased and we needed to decrease the relaxation a lot. Treating the 1/dt term explicitly kind of makes the coupled system increasingly stiff with dt. So we added a linearization to connect he mass equation with the pressure. We are already kindof bending the limits of a Newton system here.

respect to pressure at constant enthalpy:

\begin{equation}
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}\right)_h =
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}\right)_T -
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial T}\right)_p\,
\frac{\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial p}\right)_T}
{\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial T}\right)_p}.
\label{density-pressure-derivative}
\end{equation}

The corresponding pressure block gives the monolithic mass equation

\begin{equation}
\label{mass-dis-monolithic}
\boldsymbol{M_{mm}}\vec{\dot{m}} +
\boldsymbol{M_{mp}}\vec{P} +
\boldsymbol{M_{mw}}\vec{w} = \vec{b_m}.
\end{equation}

Here $\boldsymbol{M_{mp}}$ is present when density and energy are computed in a transient solve and
is zero for a steady solve. The constant-enthalpy derivative includes both the direct pressure
dependence of density and the temperature response required to hold enthalpy fixed. This is
important for [PBSodiumFluidProperties.md] and other fluids even when a density model has little or
no direct pressure dependence at constant temperature. Including this block removes an
$\mathcal{O}(1/\Delta t)$ pressure fixed-point feedback that otherwise becomes unstable as the time

> step decreases.

Reviewer: umm I ll need to understand that

Author: With drho/dt treated explicitly the feedback in pressure (assuming slight pressure dependence in rho) could be very intense between iteration due to the large 1/dt. Not a big deal for moderate 1/dt but can get strong and make the iteration stiff.

Author: This description is wrong, for PBSodium when we dont have p dependence the matrix block is going to be zero. Will alter it.

Author: Modified!

rows. Also define $D_V=\operatorname{diag}(V_{i,k}/\Delta t)$. If density and crossflow are lagged,
the segregated mass equation is

\begin{equation}
\label{mass-dis3}
\boldsymbol{M_{mm}} \vec{\dot{m}}^{(\ell+1)} =
\vec{b}_{m,\mathrm{in}} - D_V
\left(\vec{\rho}^{(\ell)}-\vec{\rho}^{n}\right)
- \boldsymbol{M_{mw}}\vec{w}^{(\ell)}.
\end{equation}

In the transient monolithic solve, enthalpy is fixed during each flow solve. The new-time density
is therefore linearized about the current flow iterate. The solver pressure $P=p-p_{\mathrm{exit}}$
has the same increment as the absolute pressure $p$, so

\begin{equation}
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}\right)_h =
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}\right)_T -
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial T}\right)_p\,
\frac{\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial p}\right)_T}
{\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial T}\right)_p}.
\label{density-pressure-derivative}
\end{equation}

and

\begin{equation}
\label{density-pressure-linearization}
\rho_{i,k}^{(\ell+1)} \approx \rho_{i,k}^{(\ell)} +
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}\right)_{h,i,k}^{(\ell)}
\left(P_{i,k}^{(\ell+1)}-P_{i,k}^{(\ell)}\right).
\end{equation}

> Substitution into [mass-dis] gives the intermediate mass-flow equation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Substitution into [mass-dis], and no longer lagging cross-flow, gives the intermediate mass-flow equation
```
or modify the text higher for cross flow lagging

Reviewer: actually I prefer you modify above to NOT lag density and cross flow, which explains how your additional derivative term comes in too

Reviewer: as you want. Either expand this line to say you stopped lagging both, or modify above

\end{bmatrix}
\end{equation}

For a segregated solve, this is equivalent to:

\begin{equation}
\label{mass-dis3}
\boldsymbol{M_{mm}} \vec{\dot{m}} = \vec{b_m} - \boldsymbol{M_{mw}}\vec{w}
\end{equation}

In the transient monolithic solve, the new-time density in the mass-conservation equation is also
linearized with respect to pressure at constant enthalpy:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

\begin{equation}
\rho^{n+1} &= \rho^{n} + dt \dfrac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} \\
\rho^{n+1} &= \rho^{n} + dt \dfrac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}_h \dfrac{\partial p}{\partial t}   \\
\end{equation}

We then compute:

```
is that what you are doing?
We're still missing terms there
Also why not just put the new time density in the matrix?

Author: Well, the main unknown for that block is the mass flow rate I think. If we expressed the mass flow rate as the density, maybe we could create a different matrix. I didn't think about modifying all of that machinery.

Reviewer: > why not just put the new time density in the matrix?

I meant

> why not just put the new time mass flow rate in the matrix?

Reviewer: I think I know what you mean

you're talking about the rho_n+1 from there:

> \frac{\rho_{i,k}^{n+1}V_{i,k} - \rho_{i,k}^n V_{i,k}}{\Delta t}

let's make all this pretty clear in the text

Author: Updated the test with the derivation!

\begin{equation}
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}\right)_h =
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial p}\right)_T -
\left(\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial T}\right)_p\,
\frac{\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial p}\right)_T}
{\left(\frac{\partial h}{\partial T}\right)_p}.
\label{density-pressure-derivative}
\end{equation}

> 

Reviewer: you need an intermediate line to go from \rho to \dot{m} too

Reviewer: see the paper for example of laying out the matrix. it s not done as completely as I would like there either. 

Ideally b_m is explicitly in its own equation. it should be modified by this new treatment?

Author: Yeah, I agree in many cases the mass flow is the one expressed with density and you solve the continuity equation in general. But at the moment I think this change would be more radical compared to the changes I am proposing here. We could open a ticket for next FY. That is a full solver reorientation. These are just minor adjustments in this PR.

Reviewer: I m only asking for documentation here

you have some equations, they don't connect well to the solver equations laid on this page

Author: Ahh okay, I added the derivation

The corresponding pressure block gives the monolithic mass equation

\begin{equation}
\label{mass-dis-monolithic}
\boldsymbol{M_{mm}}\vec{\dot{m}} +
\boldsymbol{M_{mp}}\vec{P} +
\boldsymbol{M_{mw}}\vec{w} = \vec{b_m}.
\end{equation}

Here $\boldsymbol{M_{mp}}$ is assembled when density and energy are computed in a transient
monolithic solve and is zero for a steady solve. Its entries may also vanish for fluid models
without pressure-dependent density or enthalpy. For fluids with a nonzero constant-enthalpy
pressure derivative, the block captures an $\mathcal{O}(1/\Delta t)$ pressure-density coupling that
would otherwise remain in the outer fixed-point iteration. In the current

> [PBSodiumFluidProperties.md] model, both $(\partial \rho / \partial p)_T$ and

Reviewer: so do you have a test case where this term is active and it makes a difference?

There are some water ones:
PNNL12 has a transient but it's not changing the results in this PR
same for PSBT null

I think a dedicated transient test is needed, with non PBSodium and a transient

Author: Will add it!

Author: Added!

use the relative field change

\begin{equation}
\epsilon_P =
\frac{\left\|\vec{P}^{\,\ell+1}-\vec{P}^{\,\ell}\right\|_2}
{\left\|\vec{P}^{\,\ell}+P_{\mathrm{out}}\mathbf{1}\right\|_2+10^{-14}},
\end{equation}

whereas the monolithic algorithm uses the largest unrelaxed pressure fixed-point update among the
blocks. Measuring the monolithic update before post-solve relaxation keeps the meaning of `P_tol`
independent of `pressure_relaxation`. The maximum errors are synchronized across processes. If the
pressure field has not converged, the block sweep starts again at the inlet; pressure information
therefore requires multiple outer iterations to propagate upstream when several blocks are used.
`P_maxit` and `T_maxit` limit the outer and thermal iterations, respectively; `P_maxit = 0` selects
the solver's automatic outer-iteration limit.

Convergence status is local to the current solve attempt. Only the final pressure and temperature
status is retained, so a transient step that fails and is retried with a smaller time step can
subsequently report convergence. A failure in an earlier outer iteration likewise does not latch a

> permanent failure if a later iteration converges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
yes I dont think we need to mention this, this is just what we do in moose
thanks for enabling it

linear solves and reports the reason, iteration count, and residual norm instead of accepting a
diverged solution.

As soon as the big matrix is constructed, the solver will calculate cross-flow resistances to maintain realizability. A distinctive feature of this method is the introduction of a *weak relaxation* logic that stabilizes and accelerates convergence of the coupled $mass flow: (\dot{\mathbf{m}})$, $pressure: (\mathbf{P})$, and $crossflow:(\mathbf{w}_{ij})$ fields in a $Q{=}3$ block-nested linear system with matrix blocks $M_{ij}$ and right-hand-side blocks $\mathbf{b}_i$ that represent the individual governing equations. Note that the solution is influenced by the stabilization method and its coefficients.

#### 1. Fast scale estimates

!! Intentional comment to provide extra spacing

From the axial- and cross-momentum rows, the code forms a quick pressure estimate and a provisional
cross-momentum imbalance:
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\hat{\mathbf m} &= M_{pm}\,\mathbf m, \\
\hat{\mathbf p} &= \frac{\hat{\mathbf m}}{\operatorname{diag}(M_{pp}) + \varepsilon_p\mathbf 1},\\

> \hat{\mathbf r}_w &= M_{wp}\,\hat{\mathbf p} - \mathbf b_{w,p},

Reviewer: is M_{wp}\,\hat{\mathbf p}  = -RHS ?
we substract the RHS of the cross flow system iirc

Author: Well, this change reflects what is in the code. I assume the documentation didn't change when this changed in the code? I can look into the history of the code to check why this changed if needed.
